writeup.md, before:

# Advanced Lane Finding Project

The goal of this project is to write a software pipeline to identify the lane boundaries in a video from a front-facing camera on a car. In order to achieve this goal, the following steps are performed:

* Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images.
* Apply a distortion correction to raw images.
* Use color transforms, gradients, etc., to create a thresholded binary image.
* Apply a perspective transform to rectify binary image ("birds-eye view").
* Detect lane pixels and fit to find the lane boundary.
* Determine the curvature of the lane and vehicle position with respect to center.
* Warp the detected lane boundaries back onto the original image.
* Output visual display of the lane boundaries and numerical estimation of lane curvature and vehicle position.

The following sections consider these steps individually and describe how each point in the implementation is addressed.

### Camera Calibration

The code for this step is contained in the code cells belonging to section "Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images" of the IPython notebook located in `./AdvancedLaneLines.ipynb`).  

I start by preparing "object points", which will be the (x, y, z) coordinates of the chessboard corners in the world. Here I am assuming the chessboard is fixed on the (x, y) plane at z=0, such that the object points are the same for each calibration image.  Thus, `objp` is just a replicated array of coordinates, and `objpoints` will be appended with a copy of it every time I successfully detect all chessboard corners in a test image.  `imgpoints` will be appended with the (x, y) pixel position of each of the corners in the image plane with each successful chessboard detection.  

I then used the output `objpoints` and `imgpoints` to compute the camera calibration and distortion coefficients using the `cv2.calibrateCamera()` function.  I applied this distortion correction to the test image `camera_cal/calibration1.jpg` using the `cv2.undistort()` function and obtained this result:

![alt text](output_images/calibration1_undistorted.png)

### Pipeline (single images)

The pipeline starts receiving an image (e.g. `test_images/test2.jpg` having a yellow left lane line and a white right lane line):

![alt text](output_images/test2_Image.INPUT.png)

#### Distortion Correction

TODO:
- linkes unteres Rechteck (0, 680) - (200, 720) aus dem Originalbild und dem undistorted Bild ausschneiden und anzeigen. Unterschiede beschreiben.

Then the input image is distortion corrected by applying the `cv2.undistort()` function to the distorted input `image` and the calibration `calibration_data['cameraMatrix']` and distortion coefficients `calibration_data['distCoeffs']` (which were obtained from the `cv2.calibrateCamera()` function as described in the section "Camera Calibration"):

```python
def undistort(image, calibration_data):
    return cv2.undistort(image,
                         calibration_data['cameraMatrix'],
                         calibration_data['distCoeffs'],
                         None,
                         calibration_data['cameraMatrix']
```
This results in the following distortion corrected image:

![alt text](output_images/test2_Image.UNDISTORTED.png)

#### Color Transforms and Gradients

By using a combination of color and gradient thresholds, the function `create_binary_images()` generates an image, where pixels belonging to lane lines (among other things like e.g. trees) are drawn blue and green:
- **color thresholds:** The function applies a threshold to the S channel of the distortion corrected input image to retain pixels having S channel values between 170 and 255. The retained pixels are colored blue in the image below.
- **gradient thresholds:** By using the Sobel operator the function obtains the derivative in x direction of the L channel of the distortion corrected input image, rescales the x-derivative to the interval [0, 255] and applies a threshold to retain pixels having a scaled derivative between 20 and 100. The retained pixels are colored green in the image below. This derivative step detects vertical edges which comes close to my understanding of lane lines.

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.COLOR_BINARY.png)

In order to obtain a binary image, the green and blue pixels are colored white and the rest black. This results in the following final image for this step:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.COMBINED_BINARY.png)

#### Perspective Transform

A perspective transform is applied to the binary image from the last section in order to obtain a rectified birds-eye view of the image.

##### Calculate Perspective Transform

First the function `warpPerspective(image)` calculates a perspective transform `M` from the following hard coded source and destination points of the _test_ image `test_images/straight_lines1.jpg` using `cv2.getPerspectiveTransform(src, dst)`:
```python
src = np.float32(
    [
        ((get_width(img) / 2) - 55, get_height(img) / 2 + 100),
        (((get_width(img) / 6) - 10), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 5 / 6) + 60, get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) / 2 + 55), get_height(img) / 2 + 100)
    ])
dst = np.float32(
    [
        ((get_width(img) / 4), 0),
        ((get_width(img) / 4), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 3 / 4), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 3 / 4), 0)
    ])
```
This results in the following source and destination points:

|   Source (x, y)    | Destination (x, y) |
|:------------------:|:------------------:|
|     (585, 460)     |      (320, 0)      |
| (203.33333,   720) |     (320, 720)     |
| (1126.6666,   720) |     (960, 720)     |
|     (695, 460)     |      (960, 0)      |

I verified that the perspective transform was working as expected by drawing the `src` and `dst` points onto the test image `test_images/straight_lines1.jpg` and its warped counterpart to verify that the lines appear parallel in the warped image:

![binary](output_images/test2_warped_straight_lines.png)

##### Apply Perspective Transform

Then the perspective transform `M` is applied to the binary image from the last section  using `cv2.warpPerspective(image, M)` in order to obtain a rectified birds-eye view of the lane lines:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.PERSPECTIVE.png)

#### Lane Lines

The aim is to represent a lane line by a 2nd order polynomial.

First, lane-line pixels (red and blue pixels in the image below) are identified by the function `find_lane_pixels()` taken from the lecture "Finding the Lines: Sliding Window": A histogram is used to find the x-position of the base of the lane lines. Then by using a sliding window (green rectangles in the image below), placed around the line centers, the lines are followed up to the top of the frame.

Then the function `fit_polynomial()` fits a 2nd order polynomial to the just identified lane line pixels using numpy's function `polyfit()`, finally returning a 2nd order polynomial for each lane line (yellow pixels in the image below).

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.LINES_WITH_SLIDING_WINDOWS.png)

#### Radius of Curvature

The [radius of curvature](https://www.intmath.com/applications-differentiation/8-radius-curvature.php) of a lane line is the radius of a circular arc which best approximates the lane line at the car's current position. There is a radius of curvature for each of the two lane lines identified in the previous section, so taking the average of the two radiuses results in the final radius of curvature of a car located in the middle inbetween the two lane lines (see `get_radius_of_curvature()`). An example of the radius of curvature can be seen in the image of the section "Lane Area on Road".

#### Vehicle Position

The "Tips and Tricks for the Project" lecture says:
> You can assume the camera is mounted at the center of the car, such that the lane center is the midpoint at the bottom of the image between the two lines you've detected. The offset (= vehicle position) of the lane center from the center of the image (converted from pixels to meters) is your distance from the center of the lane.

So the function `get_vehicle_position()` essentially computes and returns `get_center_of_car() - get_midpoint_of_lane()`. An example of the vehicle position can be seen in the image of the section "Lane Area on Road".

#### Lane Area on Road

TODO:
- Provide an example image of your result plotted back down onto the road such that the lane area is identified clearly.
- Code: `project_lane_area_onto_undistorted_image()`

I implemented this step in lines # through # in my code in `yet_another_file.py` in the function `map_lane()`.  Here is an example of my result on a test image:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.OUTPUT.png)

---

### Pipeline (video)

TODO: 1. Provide a link to your final video output.  Your pipeline should perform reasonably well on the entire project video (wobbly lines are ok but no catastrophic failures that would cause the car to drive off the road!).

Here's a [link to my video result](test_videos_output/project_video.mp4)

---

### Discussion

TODO: Briefly discuss any problems / issues you faced in your implementation of this project. Where will your pipeline likely fail?  What could you do to make it more robust?

Here I'll talk about the approach I took, what techniques I used, what worked and why, where the pipeline might fail and how I might improve it if I were going to pursue this project further.

Commit message:

writing section "Lane Area on Road"

writeup.md, after:

# Advanced Lane Finding Project

The goal of this project is to write a software pipeline to identify the lane boundaries in a video from a front-facing camera on a car. In order to achieve this goal, the following steps are performed:

* Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images.
* Apply a distortion correction to raw images.
* Use color transforms, gradients, etc., to create a thresholded binary image.
* Apply a perspective transform to rectify binary image ("birds-eye view").
* Detect lane pixels and fit to find the lane boundary.
* Determine the curvature of the lane and vehicle position with respect to center.
* Warp the detected lane boundaries back onto the original image.
* Output visual display of the lane boundaries and numerical estimation of lane curvature and vehicle position.

The following sections consider these steps individually and describe how each point in the implementation is addressed.

### Camera Calibration

The code for this step is contained in the code cells belonging to section "Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images" of the IPython notebook located in `./AdvancedLaneLines.ipynb`).  

I start by preparing "object points", which will be the (x, y, z) coordinates of the chessboard corners in the world. Here I am assuming the chessboard is fixed on the (x, y) plane at z=0, such that the object points are the same for each calibration image.  Thus, `objp` is just a replicated array of coordinates, and `objpoints` will be appended with a copy of it every time I successfully detect all chessboard corners in a test image.  `imgpoints` will be appended with the (x, y) pixel position of each of the corners in the image plane with each successful chessboard detection.  

I then used the output `objpoints` and `imgpoints` to compute the camera calibration and distortion coefficients using the `cv2.calibrateCamera()` function.  I applied this distortion correction to the test image `camera_cal/calibration1.jpg` using the `cv2.undistort()` function and obtained this result:

![alt text](output_images/calibration1_undistorted.png)

### Pipeline (single images)

The pipeline starts receiving an image (e.g. `test_images/test2.jpg` having a yellow left lane line and a white right lane line):

![alt text](output_images/test2_Image.INPUT.png)

#### Distortion Correction

TODO:
- linkes unteres Rechteck (0, 680) - (200, 720) aus dem Originalbild und dem undistorted Bild ausschneiden und anzeigen. Unterschiede beschreiben.

Then the input image is distortion corrected by applying the `cv2.undistort()` function to the distorted input `image` and the calibration `calibration_data['cameraMatrix']` and distortion coefficients `calibration_data['distCoeffs']` (which were obtained from the `cv2.calibrateCamera()` function as described in the section "Camera Calibration"):

```python
def undistort(image, calibration_data):
    return cv2.undistort(image,
                         calibration_data['cameraMatrix'],
                         calibration_data['distCoeffs'],
                         None,
                         calibration_data['cameraMatrix']
```
This results in the following distortion corrected image:

![alt text](output_images/test2_Image.UNDISTORTED.png)

#### Color Transforms and Gradients

By using a combination of color and gradient thresholds, the function `create_binary_images()` generates an image, where pixels belonging to lane lines (among other things like e.g. trees) are drawn blue and green:
- **color thresholds:** The function applies a threshold to the S channel of the distortion corrected input image to retain pixels having S channel values between 170 and 255. The retained pixels are colored blue in the image below.
- **gradient thresholds:** By using the Sobel operator the function obtains the derivative in x direction of the L channel of the distortion corrected input image, rescales the x-derivative to the interval [0, 255] and applies a threshold to retain pixels having a scaled derivative between 20 and 100. The retained pixels are colored green in the image below. This derivative step detects vertical edges which comes close to my understanding of lane lines.

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.COLOR_BINARY.png)

In order to obtain a binary image, the green and blue pixels are colored white and the rest black. This results in the following final image for this step:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.COMBINED_BINARY.png)

#### Perspective Transform

A perspective transform is applied to the binary image from the last section in order to obtain a rectified birds-eye view of the image.

##### Calculate Perspective Transform

First the function `warpPerspective(image)` calculates a perspective transform `M` from the following hard coded source and destination points of the _test_ image `test_images/straight_lines1.jpg` using `cv2.getPerspectiveTransform(src, dst)`:
```python
src = np.float32(
    [
        ((get_width(img) / 2) - 55, get_height(img) / 2 + 100),
        (((get_width(img) / 6) - 10), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 5 / 6) + 60, get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) / 2 + 55), get_height(img) / 2 + 100)
    ])
dst = np.float32(
    [
        ((get_width(img) / 4), 0),
        ((get_width(img) / 4), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 3 / 4), get_height(img)),
        ((get_width(img) * 3 / 4), 0)
    ])
```
This results in the following source and destination points:

|   Source (x, y)    | Destination (x, y) |
|:------------------:|:------------------:|
|     (585, 460)     |      (320, 0)      |
| (203.33333,   720) |     (320, 720)     |
| (1126.6666,   720) |     (960, 720)     |
|     (695, 460)     |      (960, 0)      |

I verified that the perspective transform was working as expected by drawing the `src` and `dst` points onto the test image `test_images/straight_lines1.jpg` and its warped counterpart to verify that the lines appear parallel in the warped image:

![binary](output_images/test2_warped_straight_lines.png)

##### Apply Perspective Transform

Then the perspective transform `M` is applied to the binary image from the last section  using `cv2.warpPerspective(image, M)` in order to obtain a rectified birds-eye view of the lane lines:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.PERSPECTIVE.png)

#### Lane Lines

The aim is to represent a lane line by a 2nd order polynomial.

First, lane-line pixels (red and blue pixels in the image below) are identified by the function `find_lane_pixels()` taken from the lecture "Finding the Lines: Sliding Window": A histogram is used to find the x-position of the base of the lane lines. Then by using a sliding window (green rectangles in the image below), placed around the line centers, the lines are followed up to the top of the frame.

Then the function `fit_polynomial()` fits a 2nd order polynomial to the just identified lane line pixels using numpy's function `polyfit()`, finally returning a 2nd order polynomial for each lane line (yellow pixels in the image below).

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.LINES_WITH_SLIDING_WINDOWS.png)

#### Radius of Curvature

The [radius of curvature](https://www.intmath.com/applications-differentiation/8-radius-curvature.php) of a lane line is the radius of a circular arc which best approximates the lane line at the car's current position. There is a radius of curvature for each of the two lane lines identified in the previous section, so taking the average of the two radiuses results in the final radius of curvature of a car located in the middle inbetween the two lane lines (see `get_radius_of_curvature()`). An example of the radius of curvature can be seen in the image of the section "Lane Area on Road".

#### Vehicle Position

The "Tips and Tricks for the Project" lecture says:
> You can assume the camera is mounted at the center of the car, such that the lane center is the midpoint at the bottom of the image between the two lines you've detected. The offset (= vehicle position) of the lane center from the center of the image (converted from pixels to meters) is your distance from the center of the lane.

So the function `get_vehicle_position()` essentially computes and returns `get_center_of_car() - get_midpoint_of_lane()`. An example of the vehicle position can be seen in the image of the section "Lane Area on Road".

#### Lane Area on Road

Finally, the function `project_lane_area_onto_undistorted_image()` plots the lane area between the left and right lane lines back down onto the road of the undistorted image (using the inverse of the perspective transform obtained in section "Perspective Transform"), such that the lane area is identified clearly as a green filled polygon:

![binary](output_images/test2_Image.OUTPUT.png)

---

### Pipeline (video)

TODO: 1. Provide a link to your final video output.  Your pipeline should perform reasonably well on the entire project video (wobbly lines are ok but no catastrophic failures that would cause the car to drive off the road!).

Here's a [link to my video result](test_videos_output/project_video.mp4)

---

### Discussion

TODO: Briefly discuss any problems / issues you faced in your implementation of this project. Where will your pipeline likely fail?  What could you do to make it more robust?

Here I'll talk about the approach I took, what techniques I used, what worked and why, where the pipeline might fail and how I might improve it if I were going to pursue this project further.
